Initial draft of updates to the .NET interface guide for v21.0 generics (#814)
Dyalog/documentation: dotnet-interface-guide/docs/dotnet-classes/advanced-techniques.md

## Generics

> In .NET, a method, interface, or class can be _generic_, which means it it is a template or recipe for a _concrete_ method, interface or class. What makes them generic is that they have a list of type parameters, and the user must apply a matching number of type arguments to get a concrete version. In the case of methods, it is not always necessary to apply type arguments, as the .NET interface can sometimes perform [type inference](#type-inference) to deduce the type arguments from the types of the method arguments.

Reviewer: There's a duplicated "it" in here "which means it it is a template"

Author: That should now be fixed.

> In .NET, a method, interface, or class can be _generic_, which means it it is a template or recipe for a _concrete_ method, interface or class. What makes them generic is that they have a list of type parameters, and the user must apply a matching number of type arguments to get a concrete version. In the case of methods, it is not always necessary to apply type arguments, as the .NET interface can sometimes perform [type inference](#type-inference) to deduce the type arguments from the types of the method arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In .NET, a method, interface, or class can be _generic_, which means that it is a template or recipe for a _concrete_ method, interface or class. What makes them generic is that they have a list of type parameters, and the user must apply a matching number of type arguments to create a concrete version. In the case of methods, it is not always necessary to apply type arguments, as the .NET interface can sometimes perform [type inference](#type-inference) to deduce the type arguments from the types of the method arguments.
```

> In .NET, a method, interface, or class can be _generic_, which means that it is a template or recipe for a _concrete_ method, interface or class. What makes them generic is that they have a list of type parameters, and the user must apply a matching number of type arguments to create a concrete version. In the case of methods, it is not always necessary to apply type arguments, as the .NET interface can sometimes perform [type inference](#type-inference) to deduce the type arguments from the types of the method arguments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In .NET, a method, interface, or class can be _generic_, which means that it is a template or recipe for a _concrete_ method, interface, or class. What makes them generic is that they have a list of _type parameters_; the user must apply a matching number of _type arguments_ to create a concrete version. In the case of methods, it is not always necessary to apply type arguments, as the .NET interface can sometimes perform [type inference](#type-inference) to deduce the type arguments from the types of the method arguments.
```

> The syntax used to apply type arguments to both methods, classes, and interfaces, is the square brackets, as in `G[T]` where `G` is the generic thing, and `T` is a .NET type, or a vector of .NET types, which themselves might be the result of applying types to a generic .NET class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The syntax used to apply type arguments to methods, classes, and interfaces, is square brackets, for example `G[T]` where `G` is the generic entity, and `T` is a .NET type, or a vector of .NET types. These types themselves might be the result of applying types to a generic .NET class.
```

> The syntax used to apply type arguments to methods, classes, and interfaces, is square brackets, for example `G[T]` where `G` is the generic entity, and `T` is a .NET type, or a vector of .NET types. These types themselves might be the result of applying types to a generic .NET class.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The syntax used to apply type arguments to methods, classes, and interfaces, is square brackets, for example `G[T]` where `G` is the generic entity, and `T` is a .NET type or a vector of .NET types. The types could be the result of applying types to a generic .NET class.
```

> The square bracket syntax means that working with generics in Dyalog APL and C# looks visually similar, except that C# uses angle brackets instead, as illustrated by the example below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The square bracket syntax means that working with generics in Dyalog APL and C# looks visually similar, except that C# uses angle brackets, as illustrated by the example below:
```

```C#
// Instantiate a concrete version of a generic class in C#
new System.Collections.Generic.List<System.Int32>();

// Call a concrete version of a generic method in C#
System.Decimal.CreateChecked<System.Int32>(5);
```

> And the corresponding APL

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The corresponding APL is:
```

```apl
⍝ Instantiate a concrete version of a generic class in APL
⎕NEW System.Collections.Generic.List[System.Int32]

⍝ Call a concrete version of a generic method in APL
System.Decimal.CreateChecked[System.Int32] 5
```

### Creating a Concrete Version of a Generic Class

The class <code class="language-nonAPL">System.Collections.Generic.List</code> is a generic class with one type parameter, which is the type of the elements of the list. The display form of the type indicates that it is generic:

```apl
      ⎕USING←''
      System.Collections.Generic.List
(System.Collections.Generic.List[T])
```

A concrete version of the <code class="language-nonAPL">List</code> class can be created using square brackets. For example, a list class that contains integers can be created as follows:
```apl
	  ⎕USING←''
      IntList←System.Collections.Generic.List[System.Int32]
      IntList
(System.Collections.Generic.List[System.Int32])
```

> The shared members of the <code class="language-nonAPL">IntList</code> class can then be accessed, and the class instantiated using `⎕NEW`.

Reviewer 2: Should IntList be in APL font here rather than non-APL font?

Author: Yes

The operations can also be combined and multiple type arguments specified. For example:
```apl
	  ⎕USING←''
      types←System.Char System.Int32
      ⎕NEW System.Collections.Generic.Dictionary[types]
System.Collections.Generic.Dictionary`2[System.Char,System.Int32]
```

Attempting to instantiate a generic class without the expected number of type arguments generates an error. For example:
```apl
      ⎕USING←''
      ⎕NEW System.Collections.Generic.List

> LENGTH ERROR: No overload of the type expects the given number of generic type arguments: 0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LENGTH ERROR: No overload of the type expects the given number(0) of generic type arguments.
```

Author: This is the current DMX message that is produced. Are you suggesting that the DMX message is changed?

      ⎕NEW System.Collections.Generic.List
      ∧
```

Similarly, applying too many type arguments also results in an error:

```apl
      ⎕USING←''
      System.Collections.Generic.List[3⍴System.Int32]
LENGTH ERROR: No overload of the type expects the given number (3) of generic type arguments
      System.Collections.Generic.List[3⍴System.Int32]
```
### Creating a Concrete Version of a Generic Interface

> Applying type arguments to generic interfaces looks just like with generic classes. The example below defines a function `IsBoolCollection`, which checks whether a given .NET type implements the concrete version `ICollection[Boolean]` of the generic `ICollection` interface, which is often implemented by data structures that act as collections of elements of a specific type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Applying type arguments to generic interfaces closely resembles applying type arguments to generic classes. The example below defines a function `IsBoolCollection`. This checks whether a given .NET type implements the concrete version `ICollection[Boolean]` of the generic <code class="language-nonAPL">ICollection</code> interface, which is often implemented by data structures that act as collections of elements of a specific type.
```

```apl
      ⎕USING←'System' 'System.Collections.Generic'

      IsBoolCollection←{ICollection[Boolean]∊∊⎕CLASS ⍵}

      a←⎕NEW HashSet[Int32]
      b←⎕NEW List[Boolean]
      c←⎕NEW Dictionary[Int32 Boolean]

      IsBoolCollection¨a b c
0 1 0
```

### Multiple Overloads of .NET Classes and Interfaces

> Some .NET classes and interfaces have multiple overloads, varying in the number of generic type parameters. The display form of the type makes this clear, and the the .NET interface will automatically use the appropriate overload based on context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The display form of the type makes this clear, and the .NET interface will automatically use the appropriate overload based on context
```

> Some .NET classes and interfaces have multiple overloads, varying in the number of generic type parameters. The display form of the type makes this clear, and the .NET interface will automatically use the appropriate overload based on context.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some .NET classes and interfaces have multiple [overloads](#specifying-overloads), varying in the number of generic type parameters. The display form of the type makes this clear, and the .NET interface will automatically use the appropriate overload based on context.
```

Author: This is not the same kind of overload as the one talked about in the #specifying-overloads section (that section deals with overloads that differ in the argument types, this one deals with overloads that differ in the number of generic type parameters)

Reviewer 2: Fair enough! In that case, please ignore my comment.

```apl
      ⎕USING←'System'
      ValueTuple
(System.ValueTuple)
(System.ValueTuple[T1])
(System.ValueTuple[T1,T2])
(System.ValueTuple[T1,T2,T3])
(System.ValueTuple[T1,T2,T3,T4])
(System.ValueTuple[T1,T2,T3,T4,T5])
(System.ValueTuple[T1,T2,T3,T4,T5,T6])
(System.ValueTuple[T1,T2,T3,T4,T5,T6,T7])
(System.ValueTuple[T1,T2,T3,T4,T5,T6,T7,TRest])
```

> The <code class="language-nonAPL">ValueTuple</code> class has one non-generic overload, and 8 generic overloads.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The <code class="language-nonAPL">ValueTuple</code> class has one non-generic overload and eight generic overloads.
```

The <code class="language-nonAPL">CreateChecked</code> function has one type parameter, shown in square brackets, and one regular parameter, shown in parentheses.

> The generic type argument can be applied using square brackets, and the result is concrete version of the generic method. The method can either be given a name, or evaluated directly. The display form indicates that the type parameters have been replaced by a concrete type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The generic type argument can be applied using square brackets, and the result is a concrete version of the generic method. The method can either be given a name, or evaluated directly. The display form indicates that the type parameters have been replaced to form a concrete function.
```

> The generic type argument can be applied using square brackets, and the result is a concrete version of the generic method. The method can either be given a name, or evaluated directly. The display form indicates that the type parameters have been replaced to form a concrete function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The generic type argument can be applied using square brackets, and the result is a concrete version of the generic method. The method can either be given a name or evaluated directly. The display form indicates that the type parameters have been replaced to form a concrete function.
```

```apl
      ⎕USING←'System'
      fn←Decimal.CreateChecked[Int32]
      fn
System.Decimal CreateChecked[Int32](Int32)
      fn 10
10
      Decimal.CreateChecked[Int32] 50
50
```

> If a generic method has overloads with different numbers of type parameters, apply type arguments will narrow down the list of overloads which are applicable, as in the example below where only one overload expects a single type argument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a generic method has overloads with different numbers of type parameters, applying type arguments will narrow down the list of overloads which are applicable, as in the example below where only one overload expects a single type argument.
```

> If a generic method has overloads with different numbers of type parameters, applying type arguments will narrow down the list of overloads which are applicable, as in the example below where only one overload expects a single type argument.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a generic method has overloads with different numbers of type parameters, applying type arguments will narrow down the list of overloads that are applicable. For example, when having only one overload means that a single type argument is expected:
```

```apl
      ⎕USING←'System'
      ValueTuple.Create
System.ValueTuple Create()
System.ValueTuple`1[T1] Create[T1](T1)
System.ValueTuple`2[T1,T2] Create[T1,T2](T1, T2)
System.ValueTuple`3[T1,T2,T3] Create[T1,T2,T3](T1, T2, T3)
...

      ValueTuple.Create[Boolean]
System.ValueTuple`1[System.Boolean] Create[Boolean](Boolean)
```

> .NET methods with only a single overload which expects no arguments, are usually imported into APL as niladic functions, but when they are generic, they are imported as monadic functions so that the type arguments can be applied.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.NET methods with only a single overload that expects no arguments are usually imported into APL as niladic functions. However, when they are generic, they are imported as monadic functions so that the type arguments can be applied. For example:
```

```apl
      ⎕USING←'System'
      Array.Empty
T[] Empty[T]()

      Array.Empty[Int32]
Int32[] Empty[Int32]()

      r←Array.Empty[Int32] ⍬
      r≡⍬
1
```

Applying an incorrect number of type arguments to a method will generate an error:

```apl
      ⎕USING←'System'
      Decimal.CreateChecked 50
LENGTH ERROR: No overload of the method expects the given number (0) of generic type arguments
      Decimal.CreateChecked 50
      ∧

      ValueTuple.Create[10⍴Int32]
LENGTH ERROR: No overload of the method expects the given number (10) of generic type arguments
      ValueTuple.Create[10⍴Int32]
                                ∧
```

> However when no type arguments are applied, in some cases [type inference](#type-inference) can take place, and no error will be generated.

Reviewer 2: This is a repeat of information presented in the opening paragraph of the Generics section. It's fine to leave it in both places if you believe that is worth repeating, otherwise maybe amend to only have in one place.

Author: I will remove it so that it is only mentioned in the opening paragraph

#### Type Inference

> If the arguments to a generic method have a concrete .NET type, then their type information might be enough for the .NET bridge to unambiguously select a method overload, and to automatically apply the needed type arguments. But if there is any doubt about the type, such as when the arguments are regular APL arrays, such as the scalar `0`, which can be converted into a number of different .NET types, type inference will not take place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the arguments to a generic method have concrete .NET types, then their type information might be enough for the .NET bridge to unambiguously select a method overload, and to automatically apply the needed type arguments. But if there is any doubt about the type, such as when the arguments are regular APL arrays, for example the scalar `0`, which can be converted into a number of different .NET types, type inference will not take place.
```

> If the arguments to a generic method have a concrete .NET type, then their type information might be enough for the .NET bridge to unambiguously select a method overload, and to automatically apply the needed type arguments. But if there is any doubt about the type, such as when the arguments are regular APL arrays, for example the scalar `0`, which can be converted into a number of different .NET types, type inference will not take place.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the arguments to a generic method have a concrete .NET type, then their type information might be sufficient for the .NET bridge to unambiguously select a method overload and to automatically apply the needed type arguments. If there is any ambiguity about the type, such as when the arguments are regular APL arrays (for example the scalar `0`, which can be converted into a number of different .NET types), type inference will not take place. For example:
```

```
      ⎕USING←'System' 'System.Threading.Tasks'
      Task.FromResult
System.Threading.Tasks.Task`1[TResult] FromResult[TResult](TResult)

      Task.FromResult 123
LENGTH ERROR: No overload of the method expects the given number of generic type arguments: 0
      Task.FromResult 123
      ∧

      ⍝ Explicitly apply type arguments
      Task.FromResult[Int128] 123
System.Threading.Tasks.Task`1[System.Int128]

      ⍝ Explicitly apply type arguments, but pass in a .NET object
      i128←Int128.Parse ⊂'123'
      Task.FromResult[Int128] i128
System.Threading.Tasks.Task`1[System.Int128]

      ⍝ Let the bridge infer the type argument from argument's .NET type
      Task.FromResult i128
System.Threading.Tasks.Task`1[System.Int128]
```

> Type inference can save the programmer from doing some typing which feels unnecessary, as shown in the last lines of the example above, but it is still allowed to manually apply type arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Type inference can save the programmer from doing unnecessary typing, as shown in the last lines of the example above, but it is still allowed to manually apply type arguments.
```

> Type inference can save the programmer from doing unnecessary typing, as shown in the last lines of the example above, but it is still allowed to manually apply type arguments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Type inference can remove the need for additional code (as shown in the last lines of the example above), but manually applying type arguments is also permitted.
```

> If the user has [specified an overload](#specifying-overloads), the type information is taken into account, which means another way of doing the above would be:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the user has [specified an overload](#specifying-overloads), then the type information is taken into account. This means that an alternative way of coding the above would be:
```

```apl
      ⎕USING←'System' 'System.Threading.Tasks'
      Task.FromResult
System.Threading.Tasks.Task`1[TResult] FromResult[TResult](TResult)

      Task.FromResult⍠Int128⊢123
System.Threading.Tasks.Task`1[System.Int128]
```

> which works because we tell the .NET bridge that we want the overload that takes an <code class="language-nonAPL">Int128</code> as its argument, which means the type parameter `TResult` *must* be <code class="language-nonAPL">Int128</code>, and therefore there is no need to explicitly apply the type arguments using square brackets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This works because we tell the .NET bridge that we want the overload that takes an <code class="language-nonAPL">Int128</code> as its argument, which means the type parameter `TResult` *must* be <code class="language-nonAPL">Int128</code>; it is, therefore, not necessary to explicitly apply the type arguments using square brackets.
```
